SB 139 L56 ^' f A\.*^ \. \ .?„"*»'\ ;.* .cv Wtbfmimshm'' M^m. M^^ ElCTMCITY K AGRIGULTUEE HORTICULTURE. LEMSTROM, ALBERT R. MANN LIBRARY New York State Colleges OF Agriculture and Home Economics AT Cornell University Cornell university Library oo -(39 L56 Electricity in agncu,JSS^:Sa Cornell University Library The original of tiiis book is in tine Cornell University Library. There are no known copyright restrictions in the United States on the use of the text. http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924003336116 ELECTRICITY IN AGRICULTURE AND HORTICULTURE. Prof. S. LEMSTROM, WITH ILLUSTRATIONS. COPYRIGHT. ENGLAND: 'THE ELECrRIOIAN" PRINTING & PUBLISHING COMPANY, LTD., Salisbury Court, Fleet Street, Lokdon. United States: The D. Van Nostrand Co., 23, Murray Street, New York. Japan : Z. P. Maruya & Co., li, Nihonbashi Tori Sanchome, Tokyo, 6/3 808959 LONDON : PRINTED BT OEOEGE TUCKER, SALISBURY COURT, FLEET STREET. PREFACE. " '' I ""HE Electrician" Printing and Publishing Company I has had the kindness to undertake the publishing of " Electricity in Agriculture and Horticulture," which, I venture to hope, will be received favourably by the English-speaking public who read it. It contains the results of a long study and numerous experiments, which had their origin in -the Polar regions, were continued in more southern latitudes, and have led not only to an increase of the harvest of every kind of plant which has come under treatment, but also to a favourable change of their chemical compounds, e.g., an increase of the digestible nitrogenous matter in seeds, of the sugar in sugar-beets, proved by chemical analyses, and of the sweetness in berries, &c. The earlier ripening of some befries and fruits is also a proved result. There have been many difficulties to over- come, including the English language; but here the Publisher, Mr. Geo. Tucker, has kindly given me assistance by reading the manuscript for the press, for which I am very thankful. The like gratitude I would express to Mr. R. B. Greig, for much good counsel and many corrections. A great difficulty has been to estimate the cost of the apparatus and the quantities of some of the articles necessary for the electrical installation to enable me to apply the electric air current to growing crops, especially the cost of wopd-posts, of labour, of inspection, &c., which are of IV. PREFACE. varying value in different countries ; but as these quantities form in the totarl cost only a small part, this does not affect the calculations in a serious way. THE AUTHOR. PUBLISHER'S NOTE. The Publisher is desirous of placing Prof Lemstrom's interesting work before the public, with the view of hasten- ing the time when the utilisation of the electric current in agricultural and horticultural work will become a recognised development of the science and industry of up-to date cultivation of the land for market crops. That this deve- lopment will be advanced by Prof. Lemstrom's valuable experiments there can, . the Publisher considers, be no question. As the greater part of the Author's scientific determina- tions regarding temperatures are made in Centigrade degrees, and for other measurements in the metric systemj the Publisher, in accord with the Author's wishes; and de- sirous of facilitating the reading of this book, has printed on the last pages tables containing a Figure showing the relations between the different thermometers, and a Table showing the metric measures (with their signs) in English measures. The Table is attached in such a manner that it can be readily consulted by the reader during his reading of the book. ELECTRICITY IN AGRICULTURE AND HORTICULTURE. By Prof. S. LEMSTROM. Introductory. § 1. It IS well known that the question which is the subject of this book has been a favourite field of investiga- tion for a century past. As the subject is connected with no less than three sciences—viz., physics, botany and agri- cultural physics—it is in itself not particularly attractive. The causes which induced me to begin an investigation of this matter were manifold, and I venture to hope that a short exposition of them will not be without interest. During several voyages in the Polar regions (i868 to Spitzbergen and the north of Norway, and 1871, 1882, 1884 to Finnish Lapland), I had occasion to observe with my own eyes a peculiarity in the vegetable kingdom which also has attracted the attention of other explorers. When the plants in these regions have resisted' the frequently destruc- tive night frosts they show a degree of development which greatly surpasses that of plants in more southern regions, where the climatic conditions are more advantageous. This rich developm ent appears principally in the fresh and clear colours of the flowers, in their strong perfume, in the rapid development of the leaves on the trees, and their scent, but particularly in the rich harvest which diffe- rent seeds—such as rye, oats and barley—will produce when, as before stated, they are not destroyed by the frosts. From a bushel of rye sown they will often produce 2 ELECTRICITY IN AGRICULTURE 40 bushels, and from barley 20 bushels, and so forth. It is the same with grass. These results are attained although the people cultivate their soil very imperfectly, using only ploughs and harrows of wood. Vegetables require, for a rich development, a fertile soil and a sufficient quantity of heat, light and humidity ; but one of these principal conditions, that of heat, is to be found only in a slight degree in the Polar regions. To be convinced of this it is only necessary to glance at a map and follow the yearly isothermes, and especially the summer isothermes. The isotherm corresponding to a mean temperature of — 7°C. to — 8°C. crosses Spitzbergen, and that of o°C. goes through the north of Finnish Lapland. The mean temperature for the month of July is there io°C., and at Spitzbergen 5°C.* The cause of the astonishing development of vegetation under such conditions has hitherto been held to lie in the long day, which lasts from two to three months in these regions during their short summer. It is further sometimes supposed that this circumstance will provide the crops with more light and heat, the principal factors of vegetation. This is, however, not true, for calculation shows that the quantity, notwithstanding this long day, is less than it is, for instance, in 60 deg. of latitude. In consequence of the low height of the sun over the horizon, the rays meet the earth in such an oblique direction that their illuminating and heating power is greatly lessened, and this power is also lessened by the great absorption in the atmosphere. Since the quantities of light and heat received are relatively smaller than in more southern regions, the cause of the rich development of the vegetables cannot lie in the long day, and must be sought elsewhere. For several reasons I was induced to search for the cause in electrical currents, the effect of which appears in the Polar light, and which are going from the atmosphere * See Thermometer Table at end of book. AND HORTICULTURE. 3 to the earth or vice versa. The existence of these currents has been proved beyond all doubt through the experiments of the Finnish International Polar Expedition of 1882-84. § 2. My reasons will be shown in the following order : («) The physiology of plants gives a satisfactory expla- nation of the functions which most of their organs have to perform, and good reasons for their existence and their varying forms. This is, however, not the case with the needle-like shape of the leaves in fir trees, and the beard on the ears of most cereals. Since nothing exists without a purpose in all the infinite number of objects in Nature, then the needle-shaped leaves and the beard must have their determined ends. In fact, they are very well fitted to be the means through which the electricity goes from the atmosphere into the earth, or vice versa ; that is to say, they act in the s