TERTIUM ORGANUM THE THIRD CANON OF THOUGHT A KEY TO THE ENIGMAS OF THE WORLD And sware . . . that there should be time no longer. Revelation 10: 6 That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, the length, the depth and the height. St Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians 3: 17, 18 CONTENTS CHAPTER 1 What do we know and what do we not know? Our known data and our unknown data. Unknown quantities taken as known quantities. Matter and motion. What does positivist philosophy arrive at? Identity of the unknown quantities: x = y, y = x. What do we actually know? The existence of consciousness in us and of the world outside us. Dualism or monism? Subjective and objective cognition. Where do the causes of sensations lie? Kant's system. Time and space. Mach's observation. What the physicist actually works with. CHAPTER 2 A new view of Kant's problem. Hinton's books. 'Space-sense' and its evolution. A system for developing the sense of the fourth dimension by means of exercises with different coloured cubes. The geometrical concept of space. Three perpendiculars. Why are there only three? Can everything existing be measured by three perpendiculars? Physical and metaphysical facts. Signs of existence. The reality of ideas. The insufficient evidence of the existence of matter and motion. Matter and motion are only logical concepts, like 'good' and 'evil'. CHAPTER 3 What can we learn about the fourth dimension by studying geometrical relationships within our space? What should be the relationship of a three-dimensional body to a four­ dimensional one? A four-dimensional body as the trace of the movement of a three-dimensional body in a direction not contained in it. A four-dimensional body as composed of an infinite number of three-dimensional bodies. A three-dimensional body as a section of a four-dimensional one. Parts of bodies and whole bodies in three and in four dimensions. Incommensurability of a three-dimensional and a four­ dimensional body. A material atom as a section of a four­ dimensional line. CHAPTER 4 In what direction may the fourth dimension lie? What is motion? Two kinds of movement - movement in space and movement in time - contained in every motion. What is time? Present past and future. Wundt on sense-cognition. Groping through life. Why we do not see the past and the future. A new extension in space and motion in that space. Two ideas contained in the concept of time. Time as the fourth dimension of space. Impossibility of understanding the idea of the fourth dimension without the idea of motion. The idea of motion and 'time-sense'. 'Time-sense' as the limit (surface) of space sense. Riemann's idea of the translation of time into space in the fourth dimension. Hinton on the law of surfaces. 'Ether' as a surface. CHAPTER 5 Four-dimensional space. 'Time-body' - Linga Sharira. Form of the human body from birth to death. Incommensurability of a three-dimensional and a four-dimensional body. Newton's fluents. Unreality of constant magnitudes in our world. Right and left hand in three-dimensional and a four-dimensional space. Differences between three-dimensional and four­ dimensional space. Not two different spaces, but two different modes of perception of one and the same world. CHAPTER 6 Methods of investigating the problem of higher dimensions. Analogy between imaginary worlds of different dimensions. One-dimensional world on a line. 'Space' and 'time' of a one­ dimensional being. Two-dimensional world on a plane. 'Space' and 'time', 'ether', 'matter' and 'motion' of a two-dimensional being. Reality and illusion on a plane. Impossibility of seeing an 'angle'. An 'angle' as motion. Incomprehensibility, for a two­ dimensional being of the functions of the objects of our world. Phenomena and noumena of a two-dimensional being. How could a plane being understand the third dimension? CHAPTER 7 Impossibility of a mathematical definition of dimensions. Why does mathematics not feel dimensions? The entirely conventional character of the designation of dimensions by powers. The possibility of representing all the powers on a line. Kant and Lobachevsky. The difference between non-Euclidean geometry and metageometry. Where should we seek the explanation of the three-dimensionality of the world, if Kant's ideas are correct? Are not the three-dimensional conditions of the world to be found in our perceiving apparatus, in our mind? CHAPTER 8 Our perceiving apparatus. Sensation. Representation Concept. Art as the language of the future. To what extent does the three­ dimensionality of the world depend on the properties of our perceiving apparatus? What could prove this dependence? Where could we find a real confirmation of this dependence? Psychology of animals. In what does it differ from the human? Reflex. Irritability of the cell. Instinct. Pleasure - pain. Emotional thinking. Absence of concepts. Language of animals. Logic of animals. Different levels of intelligence in animals. The goose, the cat, the dog and the monkey. CHAPTER 9 Perception of the world by man and by animals. Illusions of animals and their lack of control over perceptions. A world of moving planes. Angles and curves as motion. Third dimension as motion. The two-dimensional appearance, for animals, of our three-dimensional world. Animals as real two-dimensional beings. Lower animals as one-dimensional beings. Time and space of a snail. Time-sense as a nebulous space­ sense. Time and space of a dog. Change of the world with a change of the mental apparatus. Proof of Kant's problem. Three-dimensional world as an illusory representation. CHAPTER 10 Spatial understanding of time. Four-dimensional angles and curves in our life. Does motion exist in the world or not? Mechanical motion and 'life'. Biological phenomena as manifestations of motion proceeding in higher space. Evolution of space-sense. Growth of space-sense and diminution of time­ sense. Translation of time-sense into space-sense. Handicaps presented by our concepts, our language. The need to find a method of expressing time-concepts spatially. Science on the fourth dimension. A four-dimensional body. Four-dimensional sphere. CHAPTER 11 Science and the problem of the fourth dimension. Paper read by Professor N. A. Oumoff at the Mendeleev Convention in 1911, 'The Characteristic Features and Problems of Contemporary Natural-scientific Thought*. New physics. Electro-magnetic theory. Principles of relativity. The works of Einstein and Minkowsky. Simultaneous existence of the past and the future. The eternal Now. Van Manen's book on occult experiences. Diagram of a four-dimensional figure. CHAPTER 12 Analysis of phenomena. What determines for us different orders of phenomena? Methods and forms of the transition of phenomena of one order into another. Phenomena of motion. Phenomena of life. Phenomena of consciousness. The central question of our perception of the world: which kind of phenomena is primary and produces the others? Can motion lie at the beginning of everything? Laws of the transformation of energy. Simple transformation and the liberation of latent energy. Different liberating forces of different kinds of phenomena. The force of mechanical energy, the force of a living cell and the force of an idea. Phenomena and noumena of our world. CHAPTER 13 The apparent and the hidden side of life. Positivism as the study of the phenomenal aspect of life. What constitutes the 'two-dimensionality' of positivist philosophy? Envisaging everything on one plane, in one physical sequence. Streams flowing under the earth. What can the study of life, as a phenomenon, give? The artificial world which science builds for itself. The non-existence, in actual fact, of completed and isolated phenomena. A new sense of the world. CHAPTER 14 The voices of stones. The wall of a church and the wall of a prison. The mast of a ship and a gallows. The shadow of a hangman and the shadow of a saint. T