Historic, Archive Document Do not assume content reflects current scientific l<nowledge, policies, or practices. 0NRCS Soil Biology C United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service PA-1637 Letter from the Chief I am proud to introduce the Soil Biology Primer. The Soil Biology Primer represents a new era in our agency's soil science contributions to natural = resource conservation. In the past we have focused primarily on the chemical and physical properties of soil. This publication highlights another integral component of soil, its biological features. The Primer explains the importance of biological functions for productive and healthy agricultural systems, range- lands, and forest lands. The Soil Biology Primer is intended for farmers, ranchers, agricultural profes- sionals, resource specialists, students, teachers, and NRCS conservationists, specialists, and soil scientists as a reference for enhanced understanding of the critical functions performed by soil life. I hope you enjoy reading about the fascinating diversity of soil life under our feet and gain a deeper appreciation of the intrinsic value of soil organisms to sustainable civilizations. Protecting our Nation's soil for future generations is of greatest importance. Pearlie S. Reed Chief Natural Resources Conservation Service SOIL SURVEY The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Soil Biology Primer The Soil Biology Primer is an introduction to the living component of soil and how it contributes to agricultural productivity, and air and water quality. The Primer includes units describing the soil food web and how the food web relates to soil health, and units about bacteria, fungi, protozoa, nematodes, arthropods, and earthworms. To obtain a copy, contact your local office of the Natural Resources Conservation Service. They are listed in the phone book under Federal Government in the Agriculture Department under Natural Resources. Contents The Soil FoodWeb A-1 The FoodWeb & Soil Health B-1 Soil Bacteria C-1 Soil Fungi D-1 Soil Protozoa E-1 Soil Nematodes F-1 Soil Arthropods G-1 Earthworms H-1 For information about the Soil Quality Institute, visit our web site at http://www.statlab.iastate.edu/survey/SQI/sqihome.shtml. i USDA United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service Soil Quality Institute Soil Biology Prinner J^q PoOCl Web The soil food web helps enhance plant growth, control pests, and protect soil, air, and water quality. Soil Landscape and the An incredible diversity of organisms make up tlie soil food web. They range in size from the tiniest one-celled bac- teria, algae, fiingi, and protozoa, to the more complex nematodes and micro- arthropods, to the visible earthworms, insects, small vertebrates, and plants. As these organisms eat, grow, and move through the soil, they make it possible to have clean water, clean air, healthy plants, and moderated water flow. There are many ways that the soil food web is an integral part of landscape processes. Soil organisms decompose organic compounds, including manure, plant residue, and pesticides, preventing them from entering water and becoming pollutants. They sequester nitrogen and other nutrients that might otherwise enter groundwa- ter, and they fix nitrogen from the atmosphere, making it available to plants. Many organisms enhance soil aggregation and porosity, thus increas- ing infiltration and reducing runoff. Soil organisms prey on crop pests and are food for above-ground animals. Organisms live in the microscale environments within and between soil particles. Differences over short distances in pH, moisture, pore size, and the types of food available create a broad range of habitats. [S. Rose and E.T. Elliott] Soil is. The Food Web: Organisms and Their Interaction The soil food web is the community of organisms living all or part of their lives in the soil. A food web diagram shows a series of conversions (represented by arrows) of energy and nutrients as one organism eats another (see next page). All food webs are fueled by the primary producers: the plants, lichens, moss, photosynthetic bacteria, and algae that use the sun's energy to fix carbon diox- ide from the atmosphere. Most other soil organisms get energy and carbon by consuming the organic compounds found in plants, other organisms, and waste by-products. A few bacteria, called chemoautotrophs, get energy from nitrogen, sulfur, or iron com- pounds rather than carbon com- pounds or the sun. A Soil Food Web Glossary Arthropods Invertebrate animals with jointed legs. They include insects, crustaceans, sowbugs, arachnids (spiders), and others. Bacteria Microscopic, single-celled organisms that are mostly non- photosynthetic. They include the photosynthetic cyanobacteria (formerly called blue-green algae), and actinomycetes (filamentous bacteria that give healthy soil its characteristic smell). Fungi Multi-celled, non-photosynthetic organisms that are neither plants nor animals. Fungal cells form long chains called hyphae and may form fruiting bodies such as mold or mushrooms to disperse spores. Some fungi, such as yeast, are single-celled. Saprophytic fungi Fungi that decompose dead organic matter. Mycorrhizal fungi Fungi that form associations with plant roots. These fungi get energy from the plant and help supply nutrients to the plant. Grazers Organisms such as protozoa, nematodes, and microarthro- pods that feed on bacteria and fungi. Microbes An imprecise term referring to any microscopic organism. Generally, "microbes" includes bacteria, fungi, and some- times protozoa. Mutualists Two organisms living in an association that is beneficial to both, such as the association of roots with mycorrhizal fungi or with nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Nematodes Tiny, usually microscopic, unsegmented worms. Most live free in the soil. Some are parasites of animals or plants. Protozoa Tiny, single-celled animals, including amoebas, ciliates, and flagellates. Trophic levels Levels of the food chain. The first trophic level includes photosynthesizers that get energy from the sun. Organisms that eat photosynthesizers make up the second trophic level. Third trophic level organisms eat those in the second level, and so on. It is a simplified way of thinking of the food web. In real- ity, some organisms eat members of several trophic levels. Natural Resources Conservation Service Soil Quality Institute 0/ UAnna systmv. As organisms decompose complex materials, or consume other organ- isms, nutrients are converted from one form to another, and are made avail- able to plants and to other soil organ- isms. All plants—grass, trees, shrubs, agricultural crops—depend on the food web for their nutrition. All^loMts—grass, trees, cUj^emio^tkefoocitA^ for tkebr KMtrvtLod/. The Soil Food Web Soil Biology Primer What Do Soil Organisms Do? Growing and reproducing are the pri- mary activities of all living organisms. As individual plants and soil organisms work to survive, they depend on inter- actions with each other. By-products from growing roots and plant residue feed soil organisms. In turn, soil organ- isms support plant health as they decompose organic matter, cycle nutri- ents, enhance soil structure, and con- t